History, culture, wildlife, food… India has it all. And from tucking into coconut curries under the palm trees of Goa to munching momo dumplings (a Nepalese favourite) amid the epic Himalayas, your experience of this south Asian nation will be wildly different depending on where you go. That’s without even touching on its 43 Unesco World Heritage sites — the sixth highest number for any single country. Those who want the hustle and bustle should head to the cities but for travellers wanting a more peaceful time, there are deep jungles, forests and mountains aplenty where you can spend days without seeing another tourists. This is our pick of the best places to visit in India to make your next trip memorable.
Become a subscriber and, along with unlimited digital access to The Times and The Sunday Times, you can enjoy a collection of travel offers and competitions curated by our trusted travel partners, especially for Times+ members
This article contains affiliate links, which may earn us revenue
1. Darjeeling, West Bengal
Darjeeling is picture-perfect with its manicured tea terraces against a spiky backdrop of the Himalayas. The most fun way to explore is by the Darjeeling Himalayan Railway, also known as the “Toy Train”, which chugs from the city into the clouds to some of the highest rail stations in India; book a ticket for the steam train for one of the most magical ways to travel. Take a day to soak up the mix of architecture in Darjeeling city itself and explore everything from mock-Tudor homes and Gothic churches from the days of the British Raj to glorious rainbow-flag-adorned Buddhist temples and shrines like Mahakal on Observatory Hill.
Where to stay Glenburn Tea Estate is a 150-year-old plantation bungalow turned boutique hotel. You can birdwatch, swim in the river and organise tours of the tea estate.
2. Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Andaman and Nicobar are a collection of more than 800 islands off the Bay of Bengal towards Thailand and Myanmar. Cut off from the rest of the world, local ways of life have been preserved here and only 30 of the islands are open to tourists. These offer a spellbinding view into an ancient, wilder era with coral reefs untouched by human activity and mangrove forests teeming with butterflies, elephants and the occasional crocodile. The beaches are impressive, particularly Radhanagar on Havelock Island: a blonde swish of powdery sand fringed by rainforest.
Where to stay Taj Exotica Resort & Spa sits just off Radhanagar Beach. Its 50 villas are styled to look like huts of local tribespeople, but with uber-luxurious interiors.
3. Kuno, Madhya Pradesh
Seven decades after being declared extinct in the country, cheetahs have returned to India. Their base? The Kuno National Park in the country’s northern stretches. Book onto a safari and even if you don’t spot the cheetahs there will be plenty to see among the 33 types of mammals, 206 species of birds, 33 kinds of reptiles and 10 species of amphibians that call this jungle home. Other top sightings include leopards, Indian wolves and bison. The park is littered with ancient forts and crumbling buildings which have been romantically reclaimed by the forest.
Where to stay The Palpur Fort is one of the closest accommodation options to the park. It regularly hosts bonfire nights under the stars.
4. Agra, Uttar Pradesh
The magical lure of the Taj Mahal makes Agra an essential stop on India’s Golden Triangle tourist circuit. But it’s by no means the only attraction — the massive 16th-century red sandstone Agra Fort and the stirring mausoleum of Mughal emperor Akbar are both worth a visit, as is Kinari Bazaar for everything from clothes and shoes to spices and marble curios. Don’t miss the city’s signature sweet petha (candied white pumpkin).
Where to stay Just 650m from the Taj Mahal, the Oberoi Amarvilas has arguably the best view in the city.
• When is the best time to visit the Taj Mahal?
5. Amritsar, Punjab
Pay your respects at the serene Golden Temple, the most important pilgrimage site in Sikhism then visit Jallianwala Bagh, a memorial garden and poignant reminder of India’s freedom struggle, part of which is also evocatively captured at the nearby Partition Museum. Later, head to Amritsar’s old-city bazaars to gorge on parathas and kulchas (assorted flatbreads) at one of the many dhabas and top it off with a tall glass of creamy lassi (a salted yoghurt drink).
Where to stay Built around a colonnaded mansion, Welcomhotel Amritsar blends old-world charm with sophisticated facilities.
6. Bangalore, Karnataka
One of the major cities in south India, what Bangalore lacks in big-ticket attractions it makes up for with an eclectic eating, drinking and shopping scene. Malls abound, as do craft breweries, restaurants and cafés, especially in cool districts such as Indiranagar and Koramangala. The “Garden City” also has plenty of green respite, be it Cubbon Park, Lalbagh Botanical Garden, Lumbini Gardens and more.
Where to stay With 281 luxurious rooms and suites, the Leela Bhartiya City Bengaluru is a sprawling new addition to the city’s skyline.
7. Chennai, Tamil Nadu
Despite its cosmopolitan garb, Chennai remains a traditional city dotted with multiple rainbow-coloured temples — Kapaleeshwarar Temple, dedicated to Lord Shiva, is one of the most popular. Swing by the Government Museum to see a superb collection of South Indian bronze idols and then take a sunset promenade along Marina Beach, the world’s second longest urban beach. Don’t miss sampling bajji (vegetable fritters) from one of the shacks.
Where to stay The palatial ITC Grand Chola is home to Avartana, one of the best southern Indian restaurants in the country.
8. Jodhpur, Rajasthan
With its tangle of medieval streets lined with indigo houses, the “Blue City” of Jodhpur paints a pretty picture. Add the mighty Mehrangarh Fort presiding over it from a rocky hilltop and you get an idea of the past glory of the Rajputs. Don’t miss Umaid Bhawan Palace, part luxury hotel and part museum, and still occupied by descendants of the former Jodhpur royal family.
Where to stay A stately private home turned boutique hotel, the Rohet House is known for its bespoke experiences.
9. Kochi, Kerala
Sitting pretty on the Malabar Coast, Kochi (especially its historic old town Fort Kochi) is a delightful mishmash of Portuguese, Dutch, British Raj and indigenous influences. Stroll around and see the 450-year-old Paradesi Synagogue, Mattancherry Palace and the Instagram-worthy Chinese fishing nets. Time your visit to coincide with the Kochi-Muziris Biennale (usually held December-April) to get a taste of contemporary Asian art.
Where to stay Step back in time at Forte Kochi, a Portuguese-era mansion turned boutique hotel with 27 colonial-style rooms.
10. Calcutta, West Bengal
Calcutta may be one of the major metropolises in India but it seems to move at a slower pace. As the former capital of British India, it retains plenty of colonial-era architecture including the Victoria Memorial and St Paul’s Cathedral. The striking Howrah Bridge is a city icon and its busy markets like New Market and Mullick Ghat Flower Market are unmissable.
Where to stay The Corner Courtyard is housed in the mansion of a former zamindar (landowner) and has seven uniquely designed rooms with antique furnishing.
